Section A - What is anarchism?

intro starts by introducing the problem of hierarchial authority as the root of the problems of modern capitalism and Anarchism as "a socio-economic and political theory, but not an ideology" the diffrence being the latter is a dogma set in stone, while the former is open to change as new data comes in and circumstances change. the FAQ emphasizes independent thought and that is not the final word on anarchism.

A.1 What is anarchism?

Anarchism is a political theory which aims to create Anarchy, a society without hierarchial control where individuals are free to cooperate as equals. traditionally, the word "anarchy" means chaos, but this is not what is meant here. anarchism has been slandered thoughtout history. Anarchism "is the one idea that can effectively ensure liberty for all and end all systems based on a few having power over the many"

A.1.1 What does "anarchy" mean?

the word "anarchy" is Greek for "contrary to authority" or "the lack of a ruler". "No government" has always been a sloppy definition. anarchy is the absence of rule, not absence of order. anarchism is first and foremost anti hierarchy, and being anti-state is a consequense of that. anarchists seek to bring about "a decentralized society without coercive instutions organized through a federation of voluntary associations". older anarchist writings generally use the word "authroity" to mean the same thing. anarchists seek to create "order from the bottom up". more detailed dsucssion of anarchy is in section I.

A.1.2 What does "anarchism" mean?

Anarchism is "the no government system of socialism". the goals of liberty and equality are mutually self-supporting. there are many types of anarchism, more details in section A.3, all are anti-state and anti-capitalist. profit, intrest and rent are exploitation. Anrchism both critiques the current system and offers a vision of a better system. Anarchism is the theoretical expression of out capacity to organise ourselves and run society without bosses or politicians. anarchism is not absctract, but pratical.

A.1.3 Why is anarchism also called libertarian socialism?


The word anarchism highlights the negitive nature of anarchist theory, and terms like libertarian socialism, free socailism, free communism, and libertarian communism hightlight the postitive side of anarchist theory. these terms are used interchangably. a simple use of the dictionary definitions of "libertarian" and "socialism" shows this to be valid, despite dictiories being politically unsophisticated. the word libertarian does not imply free market capitalism, and socialism does not imply state ownership. due to the existance of the US Libertarian Party, confusion har arisen. anarchists have used the term libertarian since the 1850's and became more popular in the 1890's. anarchist organizations using the term libertarian have been founded as recently as the 1950's. the US libertarian party has approiated the term libertarian for themselves to describe their capitalist ideology. Section I describes how libertarian socailism maximises individual liberty better than capitalism, and section H details the failings of state socailism.

A.1.4 Are Anarchists Socialists?

Yes. all anarchists oppose capitalism because it is based upon oppression and exploitation (see sections B and C). anarchists oppose feudalism, soviet-style state socailism, slavery, etc. for the same reason, but captialism is simply the most common form in the world today. Individualist and social anarchsits alike call themselves socialist. anarchists desire direct worker's control of the means of productions, specifics vary by type (see section A.3). Capitalism is authoritarian and explitative because workers do not govern the productive process nor own the product of their labor. Capitalism cannot be a true free market, due to laws and monopolies that ensure that capitalists have the advantage over the workers, enabling them to exploit them via profit, intrest and rent (see Section G). event he most individualist of anarchists, like Max Stirner, opposied capitalism.

although the word socialism today generally refers fo Marxist-leninist state socialism, ararchists have been opposed to it since the very begining, and accuratly predicted the shortcomings of the Bolshevik regime's policy beofre it even happened, and critisized it first. anarchists do share some ideas with some marxists, however. Marx's critique of capitalism and his labor theory of value are well respected. some more libertarian, non leninist forms of marxism share similarities with social anarchism. instead of central planning, anarchists advocate "free association and co-operation between indiciduals, workplaces and communities". the anarchist criitique of state socialism is discussed in Section H.  to avoid associiation with state sociialism, many anarchists simply call themselves anarchists, although there is still the need to diffrentiate anarchism from capitalist pseudo-anarchism described by US libertarians, the so called "anarcho"-capitalism. more doscussion on this last point is in Section F.

A.1.5 Where does anarchism come from?

Anarchism was created in, and by, the struggle of the oppressed for freedom. it did not come from ivory towers, but independently in many places and times. anarchist writers simply note what had already exist, rather than create it themselves. the specifics of modern anarchism were devloped with the rise of capitalism, parallels have been found throughout history. every major revolution had factions with anarchistic tendencies. Anarchism is a product of resistance to authority and thus every society with such athoirty will have anarchistic tendencies naturally spawn. anarchism "is essentially a product of working class struggle against capitalism and the state, against oppression and exploitation, and for a free society of free and equal individuals."

A.2 What does anarchism stand for?

Anarchists place a high pritority on liberty for themselves and others. the relationship between the individual and social development is reciprocal. anarchists consider it essential to create a society based on the principals of equality, solidarity and liberty. 
